Update Gateway Architecture document to fit standard NGINX Formatting (#4)
Jcahilltorre/nginx-gateway-fabric: site/content/overview/gateway-architecture.md

---
title: "Gateway Architecture"
description: "Learn about the architecture and design principles of F5 NGINX Gateway Fabric."
weight: 100
toc: true
docs: "DOCS-000"
---

The intended audience for this information is primarily the two following groups:

- _Cluster Operators_ who would like to know how the software works and understand how it can fail.
- _Developers_ who would like to [contribute](https://github.com/nginxinc/nginx-gateway-fabric/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md) to the project.

> We assume that the reader is familiar with core Kubernetes concepts, such as Pods, Deployments, Services, and Endpoints. For an understanding of how NGINX itself works, you can read the ["Inside NGINX: How We Designed for Performance & Scale"](https://www.nginx.com/blog/inside-nginx-how-we-designed-for-performance-scale/) blog post.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reader needs to be familiar with core Kubernetes concepts, such as Pods, Deployments, Services, and Endpoints. For an understanding of how NGINX itself works, you can read the ["Inside NGINX: How We Designed for Performance & Scale"](https://www.nginx.com/blog/inside-nginx-how-we-designed-for-performance-scale/) blog post.
```

remove ourselves out of the equation

## What is NGINX Gateway Fabric?

> NGINX Gateway Fabric (NGF) is a Kubernetes cluster component that uses Gateway API Resources to configure an HTTP load balancer with NGINX as its data plane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NGINX Gateway Fabric is a Kubernetes cluster component that uses Gateway API Resources to configure an HTTP load balancer with NGINX as its data plane.
```
If we are not going to use NGF in the document (and as per marketing, we shouldn't) I would not add it in brackets after.

{{< note >}} To learn more about the Gateway API, you can read the [official Kubernetes documentation](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/). {{< /note >}}

> ## NGINX Gateway Fabric at a High Level

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## NGINX Gateway Fabric at a high level
```

Reviewer: check slack conversation about Title Case

This figure depicts an example of NGINX Gateway Fabric exposing two web applications within a Kubernetes cluster to clients on the internet:

{{<img src="/img/ngf-high-level.png" alt="">}}

> {{< note >}} For simplicity, many necessary Kubernetes resources like Deployment and Services aren't shown, which the Cluster Operator and the Application Developers also need to create. {{< /note >}} 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< note >}} For simplicity, the diagram does not show many of the necessary Kubernetes resources like deployment and services that the the Cluster Operator and the Application Developers also need to create {{< /note >}} 
```

- _Application A_ with two Pods deployed in the _applications_ Namespace by _Application Developer A_. To expose the
application to its clients (_Clients A_) via the host `a.example.com`, _Application Developer A_ creates _HTTPRoute A_
and attaches it to `Gateway AB`.
- _Application B_ with one Pod deployed in the _applications_ Namespace by _Application Developer B_. To expose the
application to its clients (_Clients B_) via the host `b.example.com`, _Application Developer B_ creates _HTTPRoute B_
and attaches it to `Gateway AB`.
- _Public Endpoint_, which fronts the _NGF_ Pod. This is typically a TCP load balancer (cloud, software, or hardware)
or a combination of such load balancer with a NodePort Service. _Clients A_ and _B_ connect to their applications via
the _Public Endpoint_.

The yellow and purple arrows represent connections related to the client traffic, and the black arrows represent access to the Kubernetes API. The resources within the cluster are color-coded based on the user responsible for their creation.  

For example, the Cluster Operator is denoted by the color green, indicating they create and manage all the green resources.

> ## The NGINX Gateway Fabric Pod

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The NGINX Gateway Fabric pod
```

> The NGINX Gateway Fabric consists of two containers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NGINX Gateway Fabric consists of two containers:
```

1. `nginx`: the data plane. Consists of an NGINX master process and NGINX worker processes. The master process controls the worker processes. The worker processes handle the client traffic and load balance traffic to the backend applications.
1. `nginx-gateway`: the control plane. Watches Kubernetes objects and configures NGINX.

These containers are deployed in a single Pod as a Kubernetes Deployment.

The `nginx-gateway`, or the control plane, is a [Kubernetes controller](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/controller/), written with the [controller-runtime](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/controller-runtime) library. It watches Kubernetes objects (Services, Endpoints, Secrets, and Gateway API CRDs), translates them to NGINX configuration, and configures NGINX. 

This configuration happens in two stages:

1. NGINX configuration files are written to the NGINX configuration volume shared by the `nginx-gateway` and `nginx`
containers. 

> 2. The control plane reloads the NGINX process. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The control plane reloads the NGINX process. 
```

> This is possible because the two
> containers [share a process namespace](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/share-process-namespace/), allowing the NGF process to send signals to the NGINX master process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is possible because the two containers [share a process namespace](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/share-process-namespace/), allowing the NGF process to send signals to the NGINX main process.
```

The following diagram represents the connections, relationships and interactions between process with the `nginx` and `nginx-gateway` containers, as well as external processes/entities.

{{<img src="/img/ngf-pod.png" alt="">}}

> The following list describes the connections, preceeded by their types in parentheses. For brevity, the suffix "process" has been omitted from the process descriptions.

Reviewer: Would this be better as a table?

     the global and http configuration settings for NGINX. In addition, _NGINX master_
     reads the NJS modules referenced in the configuration when it starts or during a reload. NJS modules are stored in
     the `/usr/lib/nginx/modules` directory.
9. (File I/O) The _NGINX master_ sends logs to its _stdout_ and _stderr_, which are collected by the container runtime.
10. (File I/O) An _NGINX worker_ writes logs to its _stdout_ and _stderr_, which are collected by the container runtime.
11. (Signal) The _NGINX master_ controls the [lifecycle of _NGINX workers_](https://nginx.org/en/docs/control.html#reconfiguration) it creates workers with the new
    configuration and shutdowns workers with the old configuration.
12. (HTTP) To consider a configuration reload a success, _NGF_ ensures that at least one NGINX worker has the new
    configuration. To do that, _NGF_ checks a particular endpoint via the unix:/var/run/nginx/nginx-config-version.sock
    UNIX socket.
13. (HTTP, HTTPS) A _client_ sends traffic to and receives traffic from any of the _NGINX workers_ on ports 80 and 443.
14. (HTTP, HTTPS) An _NGINX worker_ sends traffic to and receives traffic from the _backends_.

> ## Pod Readiness

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Pod readiness
```

> The `nginx-gateway` container includes a readiness endpoint available via the `/readyz` path. The endpoint
> is periodically checked by a [readiness probe](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-liveness-readiness-startup-probes/#define-readiness-probes) on startup, returning a `200 OK` response when the Pod can accept traffic for the data plane. After the control plane successfully starts, the Pod becomes ready.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `nginx-gateway` container includes a readiness endpoint available via the `/readyz` path. A [readiness probe](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-liveness-readiness-startup-probes/#define-readiness-probes) periodically checks the endpoint on startup, returning a `200 OK` response when the Pod can accept traffic for the data plane. After the control plane successfully starts, the Pod becomes ready.
```
